# free-exchange

This project is intended to culminate in a 'Canadian supplement and update' to _Sowell,
Thomas. [Basic Economics](https://www.amazon.ca/Basic-Economics-Thomas-Sowell/dp/0465060730), 5d ed. (2015)_.

Status: summary of principles in progress of being compiled.

* OVERVIEW
    * Chapter 1: What Is Economics?
        * Economics is the study of the use of scarce resources that have alternative uses.
        * The role of economics is to study cause and effect, showing what happens when you do specific things in
          specific ways.
        * **What is relevant is the incentives created by economic decisions, not the intended goals of those
          decisions.**
* PART I:  PRICES AND MARKETS
    * Chapter 2: The Role of Prices
        * The role of prices is to allocate resources to their most valued uses. Prices signal how much individuals
          value a resources relative to others who value those same resources. Price changes occur organically as
          individuals adjust their behaviour in response to changes in supply and demand.
        * Losses are as important as gains in providing price signals. Gains provide incentives to individuals to _do_
          something. Losses provide individuals with incentives to _not do_ something.
        * **Price should not be confused with cost. From the standpoint of society, the "cost" of anything is the value
          it has in alternative uses.**
        * As a general principle, **the price which one consumer is willing to pay for a resource is the price other
          consumers are forced to pay for that same resource.**
        * The adjustments to individual behaviour are incremental as prices change. This is known as incremental
          substitution. Therefore, resources organically flow to their most valued uses. People buy more at a lower
          price, and buy less at a higher price. Producers supply more at a higher price, and supply less at a lower
          price.
        * No individual or set of individuals can read and react to the constant flood of price signals generated by the
          activity of billions of humans.
        * **There is seldom a fixed "need" for a resource.** The relevant issue is how to best use the available
          quantity.
        * Competition is the reason why no actor can "greedily" raise prices, if other actors continue to supply at
          the "correct" price.
    * Chapter 3: Price Controls
        * No government can "set" the price of a resource. *Government policy that artificially controls the price of a
          resource diverts those resources from their most efficient use to less efficient uses.*
        * Distorting effects of price ceilings:
            * Shortage (producers have incentive to reduce supply)
            * Quality deterioration (producers have no incentive to maintain or improve quality)
            * Hoarding (higher demand at a lower price)
            * Black markets (talk is cheap, humans speak with their wallets)
        * Distorting effects of price floors:
            * Surplus and waste (producers have incentive to produce in excess of demand)
            * Diverts resources away from economically valuable activity
        * Price controls are stupid, but often politically expedient to sell a quick fix, with others left to deal with
          the consequences.
    * Chapter 4: An Overview of Prices
        * Economics is the analysis of the cause-and-effect relationships in an economy, and to discern the consequences
          of various ways of allocating scarce resources that have alternative uses.
        * The analysis is complex because the reciprocal, systemic interactions between many different forces, like the
          interaction between billiard balls on a pool table after the opening shot.
        * Systemic causation: what each individual wants is obstructed and encouraged in part by the intentions of
          everyone else, and what emerges is something no one willed but is a fair proxy for what "we" want. Many
          economic fallacies are the result of ascribing intentional actions to outcomes rather than systemic causation.
        * Systemically irrational outcomes can result from the collective effect of rational individual actions in light
          of the incentives created by policy in the marketplace.
        * Incentives versus goals: **people will usually do more for their own benefit than they will do for others**.
          This is why incentives matter, and goals do not. "Not enough" and "prohibitively expensive" are terms of
          judgment in light of goals, rather than an assessment of incentives.
        * Scarcity and competition: invidiuals do not have to know they are competing with each other to drive scarcity.
          In fact this is a benefit. Commerce is the world's most spoken language, and every day Americans transact with
          their political and ideological idols without even knowing it. Economic interdependece fosters political
          stability
* PART II: INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
    * Chapter 5: The Rise and Fall of Businesses
        * Businesses are not a proxy for greed and profits. Half of businesses fail within four years.
        * Just as companies rise and fall, so does profitability. Judging the "greed" of companies based on their peaks
          in profitability is nonsensical. Profitability is a derivative of the efficient allocation of scare resources,
          not a subjective selection by executives.
        * Factors affecting changes in the profitability of businesses over time: social change, economic change,
          technological change, changes in business leadership, Many thriving businesses fail quickly once social
          changes take hold: A&P, US Steel, railroads, department stores.
    * Chapter 6: The Role of Profits–and Losses
        * Profits and losses are equally important in guiding resources to their most productive uses.
        * Market competition, an unmonitored monitor, is the check on 'unreasonable' profits.
        * A producer who does not respond to the market as well as its competitors will become less profitable. The
          producer will then adjust to conditions and improve profitability, cycling over time.
        * Profit rates change over time, and are a reflection of productivity relative to other uses of resources in the
          economy. Judging a profit rate by itself is meaningless.
            * The ideal size of a business depends on the alternative use for resources and changes over a time even in
              established industries.
                * Middlemen play an important role in matching producers and buyers. Less developed economies have less
                  wealthy residents who cannot purchase at the same scale as in developed countries. Middlemen help to
                  aggregate demand and leverage economies of scale. Fewer middlemen than is appropriate in the
                  circumstances means less selection, less competition, and _higher_ prices.
    * Chapter 7: The Economics of Big Business
        * Corporations have allowed economies of scale to develop through limitation of liability and pooling of
          capital.
        * Corporations have imperfect, federated power structures that allow shareholders to delegate control and govern
          by proxy.
    * Chapter 8: Regulation and Anti-Trust Laws
        * Most alleged monopolies are not in fact monopolies in substance but through creative characterization to
          fulfill political whim (Brown Shoes: monopoly in 'rubber-soled' shoes, Microsoft (monopoly on 'Intel-based'
          computers). Are the compared items truly 'the same'?
        * Cartels usually collapse because of intense competition between competitive rivals, who try to circumvent
          unwritten understandings to personal advantage.
        * Anti-trust laws that prevent restrictions on market activity are desirable. Modern anti-trust cases tend to be
          politically-driven and impair market decisions.
    * Chapter 9: Market and Non-Market Economies
        * Non-market entities do not have to respond to market forces, and are historically less efficient.
        * Every system has winners and losers. In the market, these incentives encourage changes in human behaviour to
          put resources to their best uses. In other systems, winners and losers are subject to political whim and
          other 'subjective' factors.
* PART III: WORK AND PAY
    * Chapter 10: Productivity and Pay
        * Labour is a resource, like any other, and its market price incentives humans to put resources to their best
          uses.
        * To treat labour as a special resource is to artificially create winners and losers in a manner that impairs
          putting resources to their best use, costing everyone.
        * Notions of 'exploitation' or 'living wage' fail to understand that all spending decisions involve tradeoffs.
          That's the definition of scarcity.
        * Income 'distribution' ought not to be compared in percentage terms but in absolute terms. If everyone is
          better off than they would be under alternative systems, what is wrong about some, who best align their
          actions with the best use of resources, being better off, creating a virtuous cycle of prosperity?
        * Lost in discussion about income distribution is the more important discussion about income mobility. To
          compare '
          classes' of income is to compare the fortunes of non-existent people. Individual actors move through the
          classes of income over time, and as long as that mobility exists, the distinction between classes of income is
          less significant.
        * The best way to prevent job discrimination is _not_ legislating standards, which allow bad actors to hide
          their prejudice. In a free market, those that make business decisions on the basis of prejudices will lose out
          to the competition, which can draw from a larger pool of qualified candidates.
    * Chapter 11: Minimum Wage Laws
        * minimum wage laws make it illegal to pay less than the wage set by government
        * benefits the worker whose wages are lifted without a corresponding increase in productivity
        * impairs any underemployed person willing to do the same job for less than the minimum wage
        * impairs all consumers who pay ultimately pay more for goods and services
            * minimum wage laws create a _surplus_, diverting resources from their most efficient use
        * **the real minimum wage is always $0**
        * Example:
            * Switzerland and Singapore have no minimum wage, and have very low unemployment
            * Canada's unemployment rate is higher than the US, as is the general provincial minimum wage
            * US jurisdictions with 'living wage' laws have higher unemployment than those that don't
        * economists universally (> 85%) agree about the effects of minimum wage laws on unemployment
            * but minimum wage laws are set by government, facing political considerations
        * just as a price set below the market level leads to a deterioration of the quality of the product, minimum
          wage laws deteriorate the quality of the goods and services derived from labour subject to wage controls
        * minimum wage laws generally have a _differential impact_ on minority groups
            * _black Americans are impaired by minimum wage laws becuse they enable racists to hire less-productive
              workers without facing consequences in the market_
            * without a minimum wage law, racist employers are hurting themselves by allowing their competitors to hire
              more productive, less-expensive workers
            * minimum wage laws generally correlate with higher black unemployment
    * Chapter 12: Special Problems in Labor Markets
        * Unemployment Statistics
            * unemployment statistics exclude children, and those who are unemployed by choice, such as housewives and
              retired individuals, hospital patients, people serving in the military or prison inmates
            * different countries have different 'full' employment rates depending on composition of the local economy
            * _transient_ unemployment must be distinguished from _long-term_ unemployment
            * unemployment due to technological displacement may be beneficial to society beyond immediate frictions
        * Working Conditions
            * better working conditions represent a benefit to the employee and form part of their remuneration
            * therefore, **better working conditions meas less monetary pay**
            * these initiatives are usually politically driven, _despite_ the economic consequences
            * liberal economic policies that drive growth are the best way to make improvements _simultaneously_ for
              workers and consumers
            * Safety Laws
                * third-party effects deserve consideration &ndash; there is a role for regulating road safety, mass
                  transit operations, and environmental effects
                * beyond this, safety laws to protect the consumer represent _increased cost_ and _reduced choice_ for
                  those consumers, who do not have the option to purchase what they may consider a more optimal
                  allocation of resources
                * 'safety' is a tradeoff consideration, not an objective standard
            * Child Labor Laws
                * child labor laws were historically passed to protect a vulnerable group unable to protect their own
                  interests
                * modern child labor laws are typically union driven to exclude a source of potential competition
                * rules against unpaid internships, for example, are keeping adolescents out of paying jobs in
                  airconditioned offices
            * Hours of Work
                * different countries have different cultures about work and vacation, and it makes it particularly
                  challenging to impose universal standards
                * higher labor costs translate into reduced investment, reduced employment, and increased consumer costs
            * Third World Countries
                * developed countries have better conditions, period &ndash; there is not special reason to scrutinize
                  the lower labor standards in less developed countries
                * the issue is which policies will allow the workers in poor countries to improve their prospects,
                  rather than 'match' the developed world
                * wages and working conditions in developing countries improve when liberal economic policies drive
                  competition for local labor
        * Collective Bargaining
            * Employer Organizations
                * historically, it was _employers_ tat organized to control pay and working conditions, similar to
                  baseball today
                * that there are re-allocations between employers and employees does not mean that the losses to
                  employees are the most important economic effect, which remains efficient allocation on the whole
                * whether employer-set rates are higher or lower than the market rate, the result is higher unemployment
                  because of the overall increase in inefficiency
                * the biggest practical issue for these cartels is the incentive for members to break the agreements out
                  of self interest
            * Labor Unions
                * artificially higher wages means artifically higher prices to consumers, resulting to inefficient
                  allocation
                * unions are accountable to their membership, not to those without a job willing to do the job without
                  additional benefits, or to society, that benefits from lower prices
        * Exploitation
            * there is no definition and it ultimately turns on a subjective opinion about what people 'deserve'
            * left to market forces, allocation is driven by the best interest of the collective, not individual
              subjective whim
            * business owners face the brunt of losses in economic economic activity, not employees
            * the real question is which mechanism is best situated to account for individual views on 'exploitation'
                * in the market, each person votes with their dollars based on their views, and the invisible hand
                  guides the outcome
                * through government, a small, vocal group coerces the broader population into a less-efficient
                  arrangement that does not reflect the interest of the people
            * the best defence against exploitation is healthy competition in the marketplace, in which business owners
              are in competition to hire workers
            * Job Security
                * job security rules are intended to reduce unemployment, but by increasing the cost of employment, they
                  increase unemployment
                * the 'efficiency' of modern capitalism is the chase after what is new and better
                * 'job-for-life' is not desirable for employees or for society &ndash; churn is a key driver of new
                  ideas
                * laws (ie, agriculture) that were enacted at a time of food security have long outlasted their
                  usefulness and today represent a subsidy to a political class
        * Occupational Licensing
            * licensing requirements are just another cost on labour that reduces employment and increases prices to
              consumers
            * legal and medical licensing represent the typical overgrowth of self-regulation into bodies that are
              glorified unions protecting the interests of its constituencies
            * whether licensing actually protects the consumers in proportion to their economic misallocation is the
              real tradeoff question

## PART IV: TIME AND RISK

### Chapter 13: Investment

#### Investments

* Investments involve risks, because the future is uncertain, and those risks must be compensated to attract investment.
* Investments that consumers value attract re-investment, and resources are re-allocated to their most efficient uses.

#### Kinds of Investments

* Human Capital
    * Education is an investment in human capital, but not all education is a wise investment.
    * In less developed countries, students who are the first in their family to pursue higher education are less likely
      to pursue economically valuable subject areas because they are also more rigorous, creating a glut of educated
      people with less econoimcally relevant skills.
* Financial Investments
* Financial intermediaries create a market in which consumers can make investments that attract time and risk.
  Less-developed countries have less-developed financial intermediaries, and resources are allocated less efficiently.
* Financial intermediaries are an easy target for political critics, because their products are complex, and narrative
  can overwhelm facts easily.

#### Returns on Investment

* "Unearned Income"
* Compensation for financial intermediaries has historically been the subject of steretypes and persecution.
* Interest is compensation for the risk and delay of waiting for payment, and is as much a value delivered through the
  supply chain as the product itself.
* Investment and Allocation
    * In a frictionless market, the level of savings and the level of investment would be in equilibrium.
    * In the real world, with transaction costs, the market is constantly adjusting towards equiibrium.
    * The interest rate mechanism of the US Federal Reserve System is one level for human ajdustment.

#### Speculation

* Many markets are for products and services that already exist, but there are also many markets for products and
  services to exist on a future date.
* Oil futures and other "speculation" are a form of risk management to bring price certainty to the consumer. But the
  farmer also values certainty in knowing what price they will receive in advance.
* Some focus on trading on future risk because they have specialized knowledge and skill that they can apply on behalf
  of others.
* **Speculation is not gambling. Speculation is the opposite of gambling.** Speculation is about coping with inherent
  risk, gambling is about taking a risk.

#### Inventories

* Inventories are a substitute for the risk of lack of knowledge of the future.

#### Present Value

- Prices and Present Values
    * The present avlue of an asset is equal to its anticipated future benefits, discounted for delay.
    * Receipt of a product or service (or payment) today may have a different market than
    * One concern with politics is that politicians generally only consider the near-term future of their decisions, and
      are incentivized to overlook longer-term benefits.
- Natural Resources
    * There is enough oil underground for centuries, but because of the cost and effort at discovery, there is a limited
      amount at any time. The price of oil reflects future delivery, including the cost of future knowledge regarding
      the discoveries of oil.
    * As in any other industry, shortages lead to higher prices, attracting investiment, and lowering prices, adjusting
      to market equilibrium.

### Chapter 14: Stocks, Bonds and Insurance

* Gains/losses reflected in prices for stocks and bonds are no different in concept than 'unrealized' gains/losses that
  exist in real estate.
* Gains must account for the time value of money and the related risks.

#### Variable Returns Versus Fixed Returns

* Stocks versus Bonds
    * Bonds are different stocks because they are a commitment to pay fixed amounts on fixed dates, whereas stocks are
      shares in the business and reflect the value of the business at a point in time.
    * Venture capitalists are profitable at times, but they suffer major losses at other times (unlike bondholders).
    * The degree of risk varies by investment and time period.
* Risk and Time
    * The stock market can make spectacular gains, or losses, depending the time period selected.
* Risk and Diversification
    * By risking in a portfolio of less-related investments, we hedge against both upside and downside.
* Investing in Human Capital
    * Volunteering and internships are an investment in human capital, foregoing immediate pay for future returns.
    * There is no conceptual reason why humans cannot issue stocks and/or bonds in themselves (ie, okay for agents, why
      not students?)

#### Insurance

* Insurance in the Marketplace
    * Insurance is a meachanism to transfer risk to parties better suited to handle volatility
    * Insurance companies are compensated for the loss-related payouts plus the profit to attract a competitive market
* "Moral Hazard" and "Adverse Selection"
    * insurance creates risks since the person suffering loss is no longer the person bearing the consequences of the
      loss
* Government Regulation
    * Insurance is generally a regulated industry and can be beneficial or can magnify the risks of moral hazard.
    * Adjusting for fairness comes at the expense of a reduced-allocation of resources to their best uses.

#### Government "Insurance"

* Nationalized flood insurance (USA) is an example of a government-run 'insurance' program that encourages people to
  build, and rebuild, in flood-prone areas, misallocating resources.

### Chapter 15: Special Problems of Time and Risk

* Risk and uncertainty are inherent in life, and economics can help managing risk.

#### Uncertainty

* Uncertainty is a different form of contingency than risk, which _limits_ human ability to manage risk.
* Risk is whether the stock price goes up and down, uncertainty is whether government will change the rules of the
  market.

#### Time and Money

* The time value of money means slow moving bureaucracies will require more time and effort to navigate, resulting in
  higher prices.
* Regulations such as environmental and food safety regulations have an important purpose, but at the cost of time, and
  money.

#### Economic Adjustments

* Because economic consequences take time to manifest, politicians can build careers by creating current benefits from
  future costs.
* The commodities 'speculator' who is able to better bear the risk of a pool of different assets is also providing the
  producer with a means for economic adjustment.

#### Time and Politics

* Politics is largely about short-term adjustments where the sustainable, long-term adjustment is bitter medicine.
* In addition to misallocating resources, politically driven decisions such as price controls also break the signalling
  function of the market and change behaviour of market actors.
* "Rustbelts" have job losses despite a thriving economy, because of structural changes in the market. Focusing on the
  lost jobs, at the expense of transition, simply delays the inevitable to the expense of the collective.

#### Time and Foresight

* Similarly, politicians like to interfere with the gains of investors that are politically characterized as windfalls,
  whereas they reflect the exercise of foresight by the investor, and should be encouraged.
* Individuals and businesses have real foresight, even if it is imperfect and leads to hoarding toilet paper at strange
  times in history.
* Too many social and economic policies are discussed in terms of the goals they proclaim, rather than the incentives
  they create.

#### To complete:

* PART V: THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
    * Chapter 16: National Output
    * Chapter 17: Money and the Banking System
    * Chapter 18: Government Functions
    * Chapter 19: Government Finance
    * Chapter 20: Special Problems in the National Economy
* PART VI: THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY
    * Chapter 21: International Trade
    * Chapter 22: International Transfers of Wealth
    * Chapter 23: International Disparities in Wealth
* PART VII: SPECIAL ECONOMIC ISSUES
    * Chapter 24: Myths About Markets
    * Chapter 25: “Non-Economic” Values
    * Chapter 26: The History of Economics 
    
